 
Website: www.coe.int/cm  Declaration by the Committee of Ministers  
on the manipulative capabilities of algorithmic processes  
 
(Adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 13 February  2019  
at the 1337th meeting of the Ministers' Deputies)  
  
1. Council of Europe member States have committed themselves to building societies based on the 
values of democracy, human rights and the rule of law. This commitment remains and should be honoured 
throughout the ongoing process of societal transformation tha t is fuelled by technological advancements. 
Member States must ensure the rights and freedoms enshrined in the Convention for the Protection of 
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ETS No. 5)  to everyone within their jurisdiction, equally offline 
and online, in an environment of unprecedented political, economic and cultural globalisation and 
connectedness.   
 
2. Digital services are used today as an essential tool of modern communication, includin g political 
communication between governments and between public institutions and citizens. Moreover, they are 
fundamental for a growing number of users for news consumption, education, entertainment, commercial 
transactions and multiple other forms of eve ryday activities.  This results in unprecedented amounts of new 
data that are constantly created with mounting speed and scale.  
 
3. Advanced technologies play a pivotal role in maintaining the efficiency and public service value of 
digitisation , in strengtheni ng individual autonomy and self -determination, and in enhancing human 
flourishing by creating optimal conditions for the exercise of human rights. Reference is made in this context 
to Recommendation CM/Rec(2007)16  of the Committee of Ministers to member States on measures to 
promote the public service value of the internet; Recommendation CM/Rec(2014)6  of the Committee of 
Ministers to member States on a G uide to human rights for internet users; and Recommendation 
CM/Rec(2 018)2  of the Committee of Ministers to member States on the roles and responsibilities of internet 
intermediaries.  
 
4. Technology is an ever growing presence in our daily lives and prompts users to disclose their 
relevant, including personal, data voluntar ily and for comparatively small awards of personal convenience. 
Public  awareness, however, remains limited r egarding  the extent to which everyday devices collect and 
generate vast amounts of data.  These data are  used to train machine -learning technologies to prioritise  
search results, to predict and shape personal  preferences, to alter information flows, and, sometimes, to 
subject individuals to behavioural experimentation.  
 
5. Current discussions regarding the application and strengthening of data protection laws should 
consider the particular risks for and interests of those persons that may be especially unaware of the 
dangers of data exploitation. This includes children as we ll as persons belonging to marginalised 
communities who may face language barriers or other structural disadvantages. It may also include those 
who, because of their particularly large digital footprint, are especially exposed to new forms of data -driven 
surveillance . 
 
6.  Increasingly, computational means make it possible to infer intimate and detailed information about 
individuals from readily available data. This supports the sorting of individuals into categories, thereby 
reinforcing different forms of social, cultural,  religious, legal and economic segregation and discrimination. It 
also facilitates the micro -targeting of individuals based on profiles in ways that may profoundly affect their 
lives.  
  MINISTERS’ DEPUTIES  Declarations  Decl(13/02/2019)1  13 February 2019 
 Decl( 13/02/2019 )1 2 
 
7. Moreover, data -driven technologies and systems are designed to conti nuously achieve optimum 
solutions within the given parameters specified by their developers. When operating at scale, such 
optimisation processes inevitably prioritise certain values over others, thereby shaping the contexts and 
environments in which indiv iduals, users and non -users alike, process information and make their decisions. 
This reconfiguration of environments may be beneficial for some individuals and groups while detrimental to 
others, which raises serious questions about the resulting distribu tional outcomes. The effects of the 
targeted use of constantly expanding volumes of aggregated data on the exercise of human rights in a 
broader sense, significantly beyond the current notions of personal data protection and privacy, remain 
understudied an d require serious consideration.  
 
8. Contemporary machine learning tools have the  growing capacity not only to predict choices but also 
to influence emotions and thoughts and alter an anticipated course of action, sometimes subliminally. The 
dangers for democ ratic societies that emanate from the possibility to employ such capacity to manipulate 
and control not only economic choices but also social and political behaviours, have only recently become 
apparent. In this context, particular attention should be paid  to the significant power that technological 
advancement confers to those – be they public entities or private actors – who may use such algorithmic 
tools without adequate democratic oversight or control.  
 
9. Fine grained, sub -conscious and personalised level s of algorithmic persuasion may have significant 
effects on the cognitive autonomy of individuals and their right to form opinions and take independent 
decisions. These effects remain underexplored but cannot be underestimated. Not only may they weaken 
the exercise and enjoyment of individual human rights, but they may lead to the corrosion of the very 
foundation of the Council of Europe. Its central pillars of human rights, democracy and the rule of law are 
grounded on the fundamental belief in the equalit y and dignity of all humans as independent moral agents.  
 
In view of the foregoing, the Committee of Ministers:  
 
- draws attention to the growing threat to the right of human beings to form opinions and take 
decisions independently of automated systems, which emanates from advanced digital technologies. 
Attention should be paid particularly to their capacity to use personal and non -personal data to sort and 
micro -target people, to identify individual vulnerabilities and exploit accurate predictive knowled ge, and to 
reconfigure social environments in order to meet specific goals and vested interests;  
 
- encourages member States to assume their responsibility to address this threat by  
 
a) ensuring that adequate priority attention is paid at senior level to this inter-disciplinary 
concern that often falls in between established mandates of relevant authorities;  
 
b) considering the need for additional protective frameworks related to data that go beyond 
current notions of personal data protection and privacy and addre ss the significant impacts of 
the targeted use of data on societies and on the exercise of human rights more broadly;   
 
c) initiating, within appropriate institutional frameworks, open -ended, informed and inclusive 
public debates with a view to providing gui dance on where to draw the line between forms of 
permissible persuasion and unacceptable manipulation. The latter may take the form of 
influence that is subliminal, exploits existing vulnerabilities or cognitive biases, and/or 
encroaches on the independenc e and authenticity of individual decision -making;  
 
d) taking appropriate and proportionate measures to ensure that effective legal guarantees are 
in place against such forms of illegitimate interference; and  
 
e) empowering users by promoting critical digital lit eracy skills and robustly enhancing  public 
awareness of how many data are generated and processed by personal devices, networks, 
and platforms through algorithmic processes that are trained for data exploitation. 
Specifically, public awareness should be en hanced of the fact that algorithmic tools are 
widely used for commercial purposes and, increasingly, for political reasons, as well as for 
ambitions of anti - or undemocratic power gain, warfare, or to inflict direct harm;  
   3 Decl(13/02/2019 )1 
  
- underlines equally the responsi bility of member States to lead and support the exploration and 
research into the autonomy, equality and welfare enhancing potential of advanced data processing and 
machine learning technologies. In particular should incentives be created to develop servic es that 
strengthen equal access to and enjoyment of human rights, and create broad value for society, among 
others by encouraging the catering to the needs of historically marginalised or thus far underserved 
communities. To this end, structural diversity in innovation and research should be promoted;  
 
- acknowledges the need to consider, at both national and international levels, the growing onus on 
the industry across sectors to live up to their important functions and influence with commensurate levels of 
increased fairness, transparency and accountability, in line with their responsibility to respect human rights 
and fundamental freedoms, and under the guidance of public institutions;  
 
- stresses the societal role of academia in producing independent, evide nce-based and 
interdisciplinary research and advice for decision -makers regarding the capacity of algorithmic tools to 
enhance or interfere with the cognitive sovereignty of individuals. This research should take account of 
existing diversity in societies,  and should include all backgrounds and ages of users not only regarding their 
behaviours as consumers but including wider impacts on their emotional well -being and personal choices in 
societal, institutional and political contexts;  
 
- draws attention to the necessity of critically assessing the need for stronger regulatory or other 
measures to ensure adequate and democratically legitimated oversight over the design, development, 
deployment and use of algorithmic tools , with a view to ensuring that there i s effective protection against 
unfair practices or abuse of position of market power;  
 
- emphasises in particular the need to assess the regulatory frameworks related to political 
communication and electoral processes to safeguard the fairness and integrity of elections offline as well as 
online in line with establish ed principles. In particular it should be ensured that voters have access to 
comparable levels of information across the political spectrum, that voters are aware of the dangers of 
political redl ining, which occurs when political campaigning is limited to those most likely to be influenced, 
and that voters are protected effectively against unfair practices and manipulation;  
 
- underlines the vital role played by independent and pluralistic media in overseeing public affairs and 
processes on behalf of the electorate, thereby acting as public watchdogs and contributing to meaningful 
and informed debate;  
 
- encourages member States to maintain an open and inclusive dialogue with all relevant 
stakeholders globally with a view to avoiding path dependencies and fully considering all available options 
towards effectively addressing this emerging and thus far unde rstudied, and possibly underestimated, 
concern.  
 
 
 
 
 